---
title: react fiber
date: 2023-01-12
pubDate: 2023-01-12
tags: ['react.js']
description:
  react fiber is a game-changing addition to react, designed to boost performance by optimizing the
  rendering process.
---

# An Overview of Fiber Trees and Reconciliation

![Alt text](/images/react-fiber.png)

## Unlocking the Power of Web Scraping for Data Collection and Analysis

React Fiber is a revolutionary feature in the React library that aims to significantly enhance the
performance and rendering efficiency of React applications. At the heart of Fiber lies the
reconciliation process, a powerful mechanism that efficiently updates the user interface based on
changes in application state. In this blog, we will delve into the concept of Fiber trees and
explore how the reconciliation process works.

## Reconciliation Stack

Before the release of React 16, React employed a stack-based reconciliation algorithm known as the
"stack reconciler" to compare the old and new virtual trees and update the DOM accordingly. While
suitable for simpler scenarios, the stack reconciler faced challenges as applications grew in
complexity.

The synchronous nature of the stack reconciler caused updates to block the main thread, leading to
janky and unresponsive user interfaces, especially with large virtual trees or slower devices.
Additionally, changes to the virtual tree were delayed until the reconciler completed its work,
affecting overall performance and responsiveness.

## The Fiber Reconciler

To address these challenges and improve React's performance, React 16 introduced the Fiber
reconciler, a complete rewrite of the previous stack-based algorithm with several significant
benefits.

## How React Fiber Works

When a React application undergoes an update triggered by user interactions or events, the
reconciliation process is initiated. Its goal is to efficiently determine the parts of the user
interface that require updating and apply these changes to the real DOM.

## _Fiber Trees - Current and Work in Progress_

The reconciliation process involves two sets of virtual DOM trees: the "current" tree and the "work
in progress" tree, also known as the Fiber tree. The "current" tree represents the existing state of
the virtual DOM, while the "work in progress" tree is a replica that incorporates the updates to be
performed.

## Render Phase

The reconciliation process begins with the render phase, where React traverses the component tree
and creates fiber nodes, special data structures representing different portions of the virtual DOM.

During the render phase, React compares the fiber nodes in the "current" and "work in progress"
trees to identify parts of the virtual DOM requiring updates. Leveraging a work loop, React breaks
rendering work into smaller units that can be interrupted and resumed, prioritizing important
updates to maintain a responsive user interface.

## Commit Phase

After completing the render phase and applying the necessary updates to the "work in progress" tree,
React enters the commit phase. Here, React takes the updates from the "work in progress" tree and
applies them to the real DOM, making the changes visible to users.

React optimizes the performance by batching updates during the commit phase, reducing unnecessary
reflows and repaints for a smoother user experience.

## A New Horizon for Concurrency and Batching

React Fiber, the new reconciliation architecture introduced in React 16, not only improves rendering
efficiency but also unlocks powerful features for concurrency and batching. This allows React to
break free from the limitations of synchronous updates and enables the library to handle complex
user interactions more intelligently.

| Concurrency and Batching

In traditional synchronous rendering, React updates the entire component tree before reflecting
changes in the real DOM. This approach can lead to unnecessary processing, causing performance
bottlenecks and affecting user experience. React Fiber introduces the concept of concurrency, which
enables asynchronous rendering and prioritization of tasks.

With concurrency, React can pause, resume, or abort rendering work as needed, and even divide the
rendering process into smaller, more manageable chunks. This fine-grained control empowers React to
prioritize essential updates and respond faster to user interactions, making the user interface feel
more responsive and fluid

## New Functionality in React Fiber

To leverage the benefits of concurrency and batching, React introduces several new functionalities:

```js
useDeferredValue;
```

The useDeferredValue hook allows developers to defer the processing of non-essential updates,
optimizing performance by prioritizing high-priority work. For example, in a search input, we may
want to defer the rendering of search results until the user pauses typing. This way, React can
focus on more critical tasks like handling user input, ensuring a smoother experience.

```javascript
import { useDeferredValue } from 'react';

const Search = () => {
  const [query, setQuery] = useState('');

  // Defer the processing of non-essential updates
  const deferredQuery = useDeferredValue(query);

  const handleChange = (e) => {
    setQuery(e.target.value);
  };

  // Rest of the component logic
};
```

```js
useTransition;
```

The useTransition hook allows developers to create smoother transitions during rendering updates. It
helps to manage complex interactions by defining specific points in the rendering process where
React should wait for a transition to complete before displaying the changes.

```javascript
import { useTransition, useEffect, useState } from 'react';

const ExpensiveComponent = () => {
  const [isPending, startTransition] = useTransition();

  // Simulate a time-consuming rendering process
  useEffect(() => {
    startTransition(() => {
      // Code to render the expensive component
    });
  }, []);

  if (isPending) {
    return <p>Loading...</p>;
  }

  // Return the fully rendered component
  return <div>Expensive Component Content</div>;
};
```

## Suspense Component

The Suspense component is a powerful tool that allows developers to handle loading states and
fallback UIs in an elegant and straightforward manner. It is especially useful when dealing with
asynchronous data fetching or code-splitting.

```javascript
import { Suspense } from 'react';

const MyComponent = () => {
  return (
    <Suspense fallback={<p>Loading...</p>}>
      {/* Asynchronously load and render the lazy component */}
      <LazyComponent />
    </Suspense>
  );
};
```

You can find my Jupyter Notebook for this on my Github.

Thanks for reading and happy web scraping everyone! ❤️
